---
title: My dev workflow
layout: posts
tags:
 - programming
 - workflow
---

For the first few months after switching from being an engineering manager to an individual contributor (IC), I found it a struggle to be at the level of productivity that I used to be at when I was an IC 8 years ago. I think 2 of the biggest reasons why it was initially a struggle for me was because my technical knowledge gap was significant (first time doing mobile/Android development) and also because after many years of being a people manager, I needed some time to find my rhythm as an IC.

Thankfully I eventually became comfortable as an Android developer and rediscovered by my rhythm as an IC. My level of productivity rose back to the level I knew I was capable of, which has really contributed to my enjoyment of being an IC. Recently, someone on my team took notice of my productivity level (very flattering for me, btw) and asked me to share with him my general development workflow. Before I met with him, I decided to do a bit of preparatory work by writing my thoughts down, which eventually became this blog post. 

So here it is--my general development workflow:

1. **Pick the right task**: When it's time for me to pick up a new task, I almost always have several Jira tickets to choose from. I think it's important to give thought to what sort of a task to work on. For instance - if I want to get through tasks *quickly* (which is usually due to lack of spare time on my end), I'm not going to pick a task that has significant gray areas or a task that I know very little about. However, say, I'm in an adventurous mood and am wanting to learn some new things. In that case, I'll lean towards intentionally picking a task that I have very little knowledge on. I think it's important to find a good balance between working on things you're well-versed in Vs. doing new things. When I'm doing too much of the former, I get bored. When I'm doing too much of the latter, I get frustrated and feel... stupid. And this is the reason why I usually ping pong back and forth between picking up familiar Vs. less-than-familiar tasks.
2. **Carefully read through the Jira ticket**: Once I decide on my task, I spend a few minutes carefully reading through the Jira ticket. If there are any tickets that are linked, I read through those tickets as well. I comb through all the comments. I take note of who created the ticket. And most importantly - I read through the ticket description and take note of all acceptance criteria/requirements that are included in the ticket. If anything on the ticket isn't clear to me (which is almost always the case) I jot those things down so that I can raise questions to the right people as early as possible. Most of the times, these end up being questions I raise to product managers.
3. **Create a document for myself**: This step is probably the single most important step in my development workflow. Unless the task I've picked up is a trivial one, I'll go ahead and create a new document in a notes app, gather my thoughts for a few minutes, and start typing the following things:
    * **TODOs**: This is a list of things I think I need to do in order to complete the task. For example - let's say the task I've pick up deals with modifying an existing screen to add a button, which is supposed to take the user from Screen A to Screen B when the button is tapped on. I'll start jotting down things like “Add the button”, “Get screen navigation from A to B working”, “Look into back navigation, from B to A”, “Update unit tests”, “Do accessibility testing”, “Write UI automation tests”, “Record demo video for product demo meeting”, "Consider failure scenarios", etc.
    * **Info**: This is a list of informational things that may be useful as I work on my task. For example - let's say that whatever task I've picked up is very similar to an existing functionality that someone else worked on. In that case, I may include in this section names of relevant classes, functions, existing documentation on that functionality, as well as relevant Jira tickets that include acceptance criteria for that functionality. This section includes all of my reference material for the task I've picked up.
    * **PR**: This section usually gets filled out sometime after I start coding. It includes things I know I'll want to describe in my pull request, and is focused on things that are intended to minimize confusion for folks who end up reviewing my PR. For example - if my code isn't the most clear/concise/etc. but for various reasons I feel the need for my code to be written in this particular way, I find that it's often useful for me to justify why I'm writing such code in my PR.
    * **Testing**: This section also usually gets filled out sometime after I start coding. This section includes things that are relevant for testing my code and much of what I include in this section ends up getting included in my PR description under the “Testing” section. I'm a stickler for thoroughly testing everything I touch and whenever I pick up a task to work on, my aim is for there to be zero defects related to my code.
4. **Get something quick & dirty working**: At this stage of my development process, I fight the urge to write polished code. Instead, I focus on getting something working *quickly*--even if it's code I know is absolutely terrible. Over the years I've learned that getting stuff working as early as possible frequently leads to uncovering roadblocks/issues/questions early, which ultimately leads to completing my task faster.
5. **Refactoring + testing**: Once I'm confident that my code meets every requirement described within the Jira ticket, I spend time doing things like refactoring, writing (unit + UI automation) tests, and doing manual testing, including accessibility testing. 
6. **Open the (detailed) pull request**: When opening my PR, my goal is to be as clear as possible and minimize any doubts and confusions about the code I have written. My goal is that whenever someone reviews my PR they'll have zero questions/concerns they feel the need to raise before approving the PR. If my work involves any visual changes, I'll include multiple screenshots of my change in different font sizes and screen sizes/resolutions. I'll add detailed notes on how to test my work. I want to make sure that whoever ends up testing my PR is 100% clear on how to test my work.  
7. **Get the PR merged**: Once I open the PR, I pin the web browser window that contains the PR and my highest priority task then becomes getting the PR merged. I try to address feedback/questions on my PR as quickly as possible. I've found that the longer the PR sits open, the more opportunity there is to inviting non-critical feedback to creep into the PR, which always leads to delays in getting the PR merged. While I obviously want every line of code I merge to be good code and not merge something that shouldn't get merged, I think it's also important for me to not open my PR up to too much unnecessary and unimportant feedback. At this stage in my development process my focus is on getting my PR merged so that I can move onto the next task.
